gRPC e-book Chapter 2 (#14303)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/grpc-for-wcf-developers/why-grpc.md

---
title: Why gRPC is recommended for WCF developers - gRPC for WCF Developers
description: A discussion of why gRPC is a good fit for WCF developers looking to migrate to modern architectures and platforms.
author: markrendle
ms.date: 09/02/2019
---

# Why gRPC is recommended for WCF developers

> Before diving deeply into the language and techniques of gRPC, it's worth pulling together some ideas about why gRPC is the right solution for WCF developers who want to migrate to .NET Core, given there are alternatives available.

Reviewer: worth pulling together some ideas about > maybe saying "it's worth discussing" would be better here? more direct?

## Similarity to WCF

Although its implementation and approach is different, the actual experience of developing and consuming services with gRPC should be very intuitive for WCF developers. The underlying goal of making it possible to code as though the client and server were on the same platform, without needing to worry about networking, is the same. Both platforms share the principle of declaring and then implementing an interface, even though the process for declaring that interface is different. And as you'll see in chapter 5, the different types of RPC calls supported by gRPC map very well to the different bindings available to WCF services.

## Benefits of gRPC

Additional reasons why gRPC stands above other solutions are:

### Performance

> As already discussed, using HTTP/2 rather than HTTP/1.1 removes the requirement for human-readability code and instead use the smaller faster binary protocol. This is more efficient for computers to parse. HTTP/2 also supports multiplexing requests over a single connection enabling responses to be sent as soon as they're ready without the need to wait in a queue. Fewer resources are needed when using gRPC, which makes it a good solution to use for mobile devices and over slower networks. [Mark to check]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As already discussed, using HTTP/2 rather than HTTP/1.1 removes the requirement for human-readable code and instead uses the smaller faster binary protocol. This is more efficient for computers to parse. HTTP/2 also supports multiplexing requests over a single connection enabling responses to be sent as soon as they're ready without the need to wait in a queue. Fewer resources are needed when using gRPC, which makes it a good solution to use for mobile devices and over slower networks. [Mark to check]
```

Reviewer: Don't forget to remove [Mark to check]

### Interoperability

There are gRPC tools and libraries for all major programming languages and platforms, including .NET, Java, Python, Go, C++, Node.js, Swift, Dart, Ruby, and PHP. Thanks to the Protocol Buffers binary wire format and the efficient code generation for each platform, developers can achieve performance better than WCF's NetTCP bindings while still enjoying full cross-platform support.

> ### Simplicity and productivity

Reviewer 2: I recall that the docs team doesn't like the term simplicity - it is broad and can be meaningless. You should be more specific // @mairaw

I described gRPC as being prescriptive instead here - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/grpc/comparison?view=aspnetcore-3.0#strict-specification

Reviewer 3: https://microsoft-ce-csi.acrolinx.cloud/htmldata/en/rules/help/avoid_simply.html
**Avoid "simple/simply"**
It's generally a good idea to avoid describing instructions with simple or simply as the reader might not find it so simple.

gRPC is a comprehensive RPC solution. It has thoroughly addressed the full range of connectivity issues. gRPC works consistently across multiple languages. gRPC is simple with much of the boilerplate auto-generated. So, more developer time is freed up to focus on business logic.

### Streaming

> gRPC has full bi-directional streaming, which is very similar to WCF's Full Duplex services but without the dependency on complicated network bindings and transports. gRPC streaming can operate over regular internet connections, load balancers, and service meshes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gRPC has full bidirectional streaming, which is very similar to WCF's Full Duplex services but without the dependency on complicated network bindings and transports. gRPC streaming can operate over regular internet connections, load balancers, and service meshes.
```

### Security

gRPC is implicitly secure when using HTTP/2 over an SSL/TLS end-to-end encrypted connection. Support for Client Certificate authentication (see chapter 6) further increases security and trust between client and server.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add timeouts/cancellation - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/grpc/comparison?view=aspnetcore-3.0#deadlinetimeouts-and-cancellation

description: A discussion of why gRPC is a good fit for WCF developers looking to migrate to modern architectures and platforms.
author: markrendle
ms.date: 09/02/2019
---

# Why gRPC is recommended for WCF developers

Before diving deeply into the language and techniques of gRPC, it's worth discussing why gRPC is the right solution for WCF developers who want to migrate to .NET Core, given there are alternatives available.

## Similarity to WCF

Although its implementation and approach is different, the actual experience of developing and consuming services with gRPC should be very intuitive for WCF developers. The underlying goal of making it possible to code as though the client and server were on the same platform, without needing to worry about networking, is the same. Both platforms share the principle of declaring and then implementing an interface, even though the process for declaring that interface is different. And as you'll see in chapter 5, the different types of RPC calls supported by gRPC map very well to the different bindings available to WCF services.

## Benefits of gRPC

Additional reasons why gRPC stands above other solutions are:

### Performance

> As already discussed, using HTTP/2 rather than HTTP/1.1 removes the requirement for human-readable messages and instead uses the smaller faster binary protocol. This is more efficient for computers to parse. HTTP/2 also supports multiplexing requests over a single connection enabling responses to be sent as soon as they're ready without the need to wait in a queue. Fewer resources are needed when using gRPC, which makes it a good solution to use for mobile devices and over slower networks.

Reviewer 4: > enabling responses to be sent as soon as they're ready without the need to wait in a queue

Is this referring to HOL blocking?

Reviewer 5: Yes

### Interoperability

> There are gRPC tools and libraries for all major programming languages and platforms, including .NET, Java, Python, Go, C++, Node.js, Swift, Dart, Ruby, and PHP. Thanks to the Protocol Buffers binary wire format and the efficient code generation for each platform, developers can achieve better performance than WCF's NetTCP bindings while still enjoying full cross-platform support.

Reviewer 6: I'm yet to see any benchmarks showing gRPC out-performing NetTcp. All the benchmarks showing better performance are comparing BasicHttpBinding.

Reviewer 5: https://visualrecode.com/blog/wcf-vs-grpc-round-2/

> There are gRPC tools and libraries for all major programming languages and platforms, including .NET, Java, Python, Go, C++, Node.js, Swift, Dart, Ruby, and PHP. Thanks to the Protocol Buffers binary wire format and the efficient code generation for each platform, developers can achieve better performance than WCF's NetTCP bindings while still enjoying full cross-platform support.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
There are gRPC tools and libraries for all major programming languages and platforms, including .NET, Java, Python, Go, C++, Node.js, Swift, Dart, Ruby, and PHP. Thanks to the Protocol Buffers binary wire format and the efficient code generation for each platform, developers can build performant apps while still enjoying full cross-platform support.
```

### Usability and productivity

> gRPC is a comprehensive RPC solution. It has thoroughly addressed the full range of connectivity issues. gRPC works consistently across multiple languages. gRPC provides excellent tooling with much of the boilerplate auto-generated. So, more developer time is freed up to focus on business logic.

Reviewer 4: Curious what kind of connectivity issues are you referring to here?

Reviewer 5: Issues is the wrong word.

Reviewer 5: Changes to "networking and concerns". Basically just saying it does networking properly.

> gRPC is a comprehensive RPC solution. It has thoroughly addressed the full range of networking and connectivity concerns. gRPC works consistently across multiple languages. gRPC provides excellent tooling, with much of the boilerplate auto-generated, so more developer time is freed up to focus on business logic.

Reviewer 6: I think the phrase "thoroughly addressed the full range of networking and connectivity concerns" is going to result in some negative pushback because of how vague it is. What does "the full range of networking and connectivity concerns" include? Reliable session solves the problem of your connection dropping and retrying without the server processing the request twice. I would say this is included in "connectivity concerns" but gRPC doesn't solve that problem. It also doesn't solve the problem of ensuring in-order execution of requests. You should be able to send multiple request serially without waiting for the prior response to complete (think high latency network) but guarantee they execute in order serially on the service. gRPC can't do this out of the box.

### Streaming

> gRPC has full bidirectional streaming, which is very similar to WCF's Full Duplex services but without the dependency on complicated network bindings and transports. gRPC streaming can operate over regular internet connections, load balancers, and service meshes.

Reviewer 6: WCF doesn't need a complicated network binding to achieve this. It supports full duplex with WebSockets which can operate over regular internet connections and load balancers. Not sure what you mean by service meshes. Just use NetHttpBinding with default options and use a duplex contract and it just works, no complication.

### Deadline/timeouts and cancellation

> gRPC allows clients to specify a maximum time for an RPC to complete. If the deadline is exceeded the server can cancel the operation. Deadlines and cancellations can be propagated through further gRPC calls to help enforce resource usage limits.

Reviewer 4: The client can also abort the operation due to deadline being exceeded.

> gRPC allows clients to specify a maximum time for an RPC to complete. If the specified deadline is exceeded the server can cancel the operation independently of the client. Deadlines and cancellations can be propagated through further gRPC calls to help enforce resource usage limits. Clients may also abort operations when a deadline is exceeded, or earlier if necessary (e.g. due to a user interaction).

Reviewer 6: This can be achieved with WCF using distributed transactions. When the deadline has been reached, the client aborts the transaction which will tell each server involved (including SQL server which gRPC can't propagate it's deadline to).

Reviewer 5: We're not saying WCF can't do these things, just that gRPC can do them.

### Security

> gRPC is implicitly secure when using HTTP/2 over an TLS end-to-end encrypted connection. Support for Client Certificate authentication (see chapter 6) further increases security and trust between client and server.

Reviewer 2: @blowdart This paragraph seems quite strong. Are you happy with its content?

Reviewer 8: Oh, good call. "gRPC provides encryption if used over HTTP/2 and TLS. Support for certificate authentication further increases security if certificates are validated correctly."
